# Perceiving less or perceiving unreliably? Disentangling thermosensory sensitivity and precision in the contexts of ageing and neuropathy

Public repository containing the data as well as analysis and visualization codes used in this study.

## Table of Contents

1.  [Abstract of the preprint](#abstract)
2.  [Directory structure](#directory-structure)
3.  [Additionnal information and data](#additional)
4.  [Citation](#citation)
5.  [Contact](#contact)

## Abstract of the preprint {#abstract}

Thermal perception is determined not only by sensitivity but also by precision, yet the latter is often overlooked in thermosensation and pain research. This study examined how ageing and diabetic polyneuropathy (DPN) affect the sensitivity and precision of thermal perception and whether combining these parameters can aid in distinguishing patients from healthy controls. Using a Bayesian hierarchical modelling approach, we estimated psychometric function thresholds (sensitivity) and slopes (precision) for cold detection, warm detection, cold pain, and heat pain in 86 healthy adults (aged 21–80) and 34 patients with probable DPN. We assessed age- and neuropathy-related effects on these parameters. Using simulated classification analyses, we also tested their utility in discriminating patients from controls. Ageing was associated with elevated detection and cold pain thresholds and reduced precision of cold detection. Patients with DPN showed similar patterns: higher detection thresholds and lower cold detection slopes while pain-related parameters were largely unaffected. These findings indicate that ageing and neuropathy produce qualitatively similar changes in thermosensory function, particularly affecting cold detection sensitivity and precision. Classification based on detection thresholds and cold detection slope successfully discriminated patients from controls, with cold detection slope offering the best performance. Combining threshold and slope parameters did not significantly improve classification accuracy. Accurate classification was not possible based on pain thresholds and slopes. Modelling both thresholds and slopes provides a more comprehensive view of sensory decline and may enhance the detection of early or subtle sensory dysfunction.

## Directory Structure {#directory-structure}

The repository is structured in the following way:

```         
PHS-manuscript/
  ├── README.md                   # Overview of the project.
  │
  ├── data/                       # Data files used in the analysis.
  │   └── ... 
  ├── parameter_recovery/         # Scripts to simulate data and run recovery analysis
  │   └── ...
  ├── plots/                      # Figures generated by make_figures_for_manuscript.R
  │   └── ...
  ├── prior_justification/        # Data and script used to elicit priors
  │   └── stan_models/            # Models
  │       └── ...
  ├── scripts/                    # Codes used to run the analyses and ake figures
  │   └── ...
  ├── stan_models/          
  │   └── ageing/                 # Ageing only models
  │       └── ...
  │   └── ageing_and_neuropathy/  # Ageing and neuropathy models
  │       └── ...
  │   └── no_predictor/           # Models used to elicit priors for future studies
  │       └── ...
  └── RTAND.Rmd                   # Analyses report
```

## Additional information and data {#additional}

The pre-print reporting this project can be found here: <https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.09.22.677851v1>

The pre-registered data analysis plan for this project can be found here: <https://osf.io/dvz94>

Information about deviations from pre-registration : <https://osf.io/wghf6>

Model fits and LOO-CV objects: <https://osf.io/7xg2n/files/osfstorage>

## Citation

If you use our codes or data in your research, please cite:

```         
Arthur S. Courtin, Camilla E. Krænge, Alexandra G. Mitchell, Jesper Fischer Ehmsen, Peter K. Brask-Thomsen, Sandra Sif Gylfadottir, Francesca Fardo
bioRxiv 2025.09.22.677851; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.22.677851
```

## Contact {#contact}

Arthur S. Courtin ([arthur.courtin\@cfin.au.dk](mailto:arthur.courtin@cfin.au.dk); <https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8189-272X>)

Francesca Fardo ([francesca\@cfin.au.dk](mailto:francesca@cfin.au.dk))
